Once around, threeey atlas, the
interstellar comet.
This has been widely publicized recently
as an amazing new discovery. And so I
thought I would just take us through
what we've known so far, but I'm sure
we're going to know more in the future.
So just this month, July 2025, a
discovery was made by the Atlas system,
hence the name. and given the temporary
designation A11 PL3Z, which is a bit of
a mouthful.
It was in fact discovered when it was
already getting in towards the inner
part of the solar system, closer than
Jupiter, 410 million miles away from the
sun and coming at us out of the star
clouds of Sagittarius. You can see the
star clouds in the wide field image and
the inset picture there from NASA
showing the tiny little dot against the
myriad stars in the background.
Now, atlas, good acronym. It stands for
the asteroid terrestrial impact last
alert system. Part of the planetary
defense that we have that's looking out
for incoming objects is made of four
telescopes. two in Hawaii, one in Chile,
one in South Africa. So, it's got a very
wide spread around the world. And it
scans the whole of the night sky several
times a night looking for anything that
uh changes, anything that goes bump in
the night, anything that's moving or
changing. So, uh, the scoreboard on the
right here shows that it has discovered,
uh, 1,200 near-earth asteroids, of which
110 are considered potentially hazardous
as regards impact collision with Earth.
105 comets and the picture of the comet
up the top there. Um 3A that that's one
of the comets that uh Atlas discovered
and 4,762
supernovi. So those are not moving but
they suddenly get brighter and then
fade. So Atlas notices the change from
one observation to the next either in
brightness or in position.
And so this is that zoomedin image made
into a gif of this little tiny moving
dot against the background. Now, it's
quite difficult to uh find it against
all of those millions of stars in the
star clouds of Sagittarius. And this
probably explains why it was able to get
so close to us before anybody saw it
because of all of the uh uh stars,
especially the fainter ones, which it
would be easily confused with. But it
was spotted by uh astronomer Sam Dean
and by the ZTF, the Zviki transient
facility, which is also looking for
things that change. Um so very similar
to Atlas
And with the observations from Atlas,
ZTF and Sam Dean, they were able to look
at the orbit over a period of a month
because some of the observations were
pre-discovery. Um, it was recognized in
July, but some of these went back into
June when they went back and searched in
the right area of the sky. they could
pick it out of photographs and that's
enabled the orbit to be calculated which
shows that it is on an interstellar
trajectory.
So that means it was moving very fast
indeed. It came uh towards us towards
the inner part of the solar system
passing Jupiter doing 61 kilometers per
second very rapid indeed getting faster
due to the gravity of the sun pulling it
in towards the inner solar system. And
when it passes the sun it will do so
between the Earth's orbit and Mars's
orbit at just 1.35
AU. The earth's sun distance is one
astronomical unit AU. By when it will
have got 7 km/s faster to 68 and then it
will start climbing out of the sun's
gravity well getting away losing speed
as the sun is pulling back upon it and
it will escape the solar system at 58
km/s. So that by then the gravity of the
sun will have it by 10 but it's
still got such a vast excessive speed
that the uh path is barely deflected at
all. A hyperbolic trajectory as they
call it. Um it has an eccentricity of
over six if you want the mathematical
description of that.
So
here's a lovely image. In fact, it's
three images, long exposure ones each,
overlaid on top of each other. The stars
have all been triplicated as a result of
the three image overlay. And the object
itself, three eye as I will call it,
held centered.
And what that shows is that the object
is a little bit fuzzy around the
outside. That's a coma around the
nucleus and a little bit of a tail
leading off to the right hand side. So,
this is looking like a comet. Um, and
therefore, it's the heat of the sun
boiling the material off. And it will
get more of a tail and more of a coma as
it gets hotter as it approaches the sun.
So, that will be interesting to be able
to observe. Um, and we think the nucleus
in the center, the large dirty snowball,
is up to about 20 kilometers in
diameter, but it's a little difficult to
tell until we get some better images.
So, these things coming hurtling through
the solar system sound a little bit
frightening. What if one comes our way?
Well, this one's not going to hit us.
That's good news. It's going to pass the
Earth at a minimum distance of about 1.6
6 AU which is about as far as the planet
Mars is from the sun. So this is a quite
a wide margin
and the reason for that is that although
it's between Earth's orbit and Mars's
orbit at the time it makes perihelion
the close approach to the sun the earth
will be on the other side of the sun
from it and that's uh well out of the
way. So
when that happens going to be rather
difficult to observe actually with the
the sun in the sky. So it'll probably be
best observed by telescopes that are
well away from the earth. And
unfortunately that does not include
things like the James Web telescope. Um
and they very much don't like pointing
that anywhere in the direction of the
sun because the sun's heat will very
badly affect it. So, it' be interesting
to see which telescopes are able to get
the best images of this as it flies
past.
In terms of close approaches, though, it
will go fairly close to Mars. As you can
see on the diagram, the orbit whizzes
past on the inside of Mars's orbit. And
that's just 2 of an AU. That's still
quite a long way. It's 72 times further
away from Mars as the moon is from the
Earth. So, it's close, but it's not not
not really a near miss. And then it
passes out going past Jupiter at around
about double that distance as it uh
escapes the solar system. Each of the
planets is going to have a small
gravitational kick to apply to it.
Obviously, the sun and Jupiter being the
prime movers in that respect.
So where's it come from? Well, it's very
difficult to work out. There are so many
perturbing factors in the trajectory of
these things in 3D as it sort of dives
through the solar system, gets deflected
by the sun and out the other side. And
we could try to work backwards to see
where it had come from. But of course,
that might not be its origin. It's
probably visited many star systems,
closer or more distant passes in each
case, and been deflected off of its uh
path by each one. And so maybe at some
point in the future, in the dim distant
future, some alien astronomer in another
star system is going to observe this and
maybe they'll be able to trace it back
and it'll point back to the sun as
having been where it last visited. but
it's not really the same thing as where
its origin was.
Now, it'd be very very interesting to
study a object like this coming from
another star system up close and in
detail. Uh but by the time we spot them,
it's a little difficult to uh put a
spacecraft together, launch it, and uh
chase after it and try and catch it. Uh
they're moving so fast that's incredibly
hard. But we are planning and the
European Space Agency estimates a launch
date in 2029. So in only four years time
of a spacecraft called the comet
interceptor mission. The idea of this is
to pre-esign and pre-launch the
spacecraft and park it out at L2, the
Lrangege point,
the balance point of gravity between the
Earth and the Sun shown in the diagram
there. There are five lrangege points.
L1 is between the Earth and the Sun
where the Earth's gravity is pulling
outwards on the object countermanding
some of the pull inwards from the Sun
and so the object takes an orbit but
takes one year just like the Earth does.
So it stays put at L1 and there's a
corresponding balance point the other
side where the Earth is pulling inwards
along with the Sun giving a little bit
of extra acceleration and so a wider
orbit can still take a year. That's L2
and that's where the comet interceptor
mission is going to park. Um, and there
are several spacecraft there already,
uh, including the James Webb Space
Telescope. And then you have the other
three points, L3 on the far side of the
sun, L4 and L5, 60 ahead, and 60
behind the Earth in the same orbit as
the Earth. And again, there's a complex
geometry that uh, adds up to those being
quai stable. They're not fully stable in
the long run. um but over very many
thousands of years you're very likely to
stay put or you can in fact go into a
little um orbital pattern wobbling
around these lrangee points and that's
actually what they do with things like
James Web. It's not at L2, it's in an
orbit around L2 that oscillates back and
forth uh but roughly speaking follows
around keeping a million miles out from
beyond the Earth. So the spacecraft will
park out there and lie in wait for a
suitable target. And the the objective
for it originally was to wait for a
comet to come in from the u cloud on a
long orbit out from that reservoir of
leftover icy bodies way out beyond uh
the sort of outer reaches of the planets
out in the frozen part of the solar
system. Every now and again uh something
gets a pertubation, a small
gravitational kick and comes hurtling
into the inner solar system as a comet.
And as such, they're very interesting
because they've not been near the sun
before or at least not very many times.
And so the material is largely
unmolested and represents the original
formation composition of the solar
system. That's very intriguing from a a
chemical origin point of view. But how
much better would it be to be able to be
ready for the next interstellar visitor?
And uh we've missed 3i because by the
time we uh get this spacecraft, it'll be
uh launched in four years time. 3i will
be out of the solar system and gone. But
perhaps we'll be ready for 4 I or 5i
whenever that gets discovered. But we
seem to be discovering these with an
everinccreasing frequency just because
telescopes are getting so much better
and things like the uh Atlas and the ZTF
and now the Vera Rubin telescope are
going to be very very good at spotting
these moving objects against the
background of stars. So expect many more
discoveries to come.
And if you're interested to take a look
at the first and second interstellar
visitors, one eye Umua Mua and two I
Borisov, then I did a video of this
about four years ago now, and that's
still on YouTube. There's the uh the
link to it there. And I'll pop that in
the uh description of this video as well
in case you're interested in what we
knew at the time. And maybe I should
take a new look at those at some point
because I'm sure we've learned some more
since I was able to uh create that video
back during the COVID lockdown period in
fact. Anyway, thanks very much for
listening. I hope you enjoy this one and
do take a look at uh the previous
interstellar video as well. Bye for now.